---
date: "2022-01-07"
title: "Lacking Identity"
---

Recently I was driving through the mountains of Western North Carolina shortly after a snowfall. Even on the small, winding roads that lead up to Banner Elk, each were plowed and salted just as Downtown Anywhere would be at this part of the season. Long driveways that twisted out of sight to people's properties were all nicely plowed as well.

Eventually I passed the place that shoulders the burden of responsibility keeping the roads clear. It was a small building with a bunch of vehicles parked around, notably three or four trucks each equipped with a plow in the front and a bucket in the back. It was half past seven in the morning when I drove by, and clearly the drivers of these trucks had already completed their work for the day.

In the past, my first thought about the people who do the job of keeping the roads clear would be about how difficult it must be to get up in the middle of the night to ensure the residents and visitors of the mountain could get around the next morning. Instead, I thought about how rewarding it must be to have such a tangibly important role in the operation of a community. Every neighbor, business, church, and school needs these drivers to function and even though they are paying a fee to these drivers either directly or via their taxes, this service is really more valuable than the money they receive. If the plowing business decided to close up shop, who's to say if there are more folks on this mountain with the skills or grit to take their place? Or if the service from the next mountain over has the capacity to plow this mountain as well? 

The folks who plow the roads of the mountain are providing a critical service to the community, and anyone who is invested in that community knows it. The owner of the coffee shop in town owes them a debt that a monthly invoice payment and free coffee for life really doesn't cover, but the drivers do it anyway because it needs to be done.

I've been a professional software developer for about five years, mostly in the financial sector. While my career has so far been rewarding in a fiscal sense, the times i've found it rewarding in the way that the truck drivers must find theirs are few and far between. Perhaps when I've mentored someone new to the field, or helped a team get a large project over the finish line, but being one one-hundred-thousandth of the machine that enables you to put your money into the ether and pull it back out as-needed just doesn't hit the same as being the sole reason you can leave your house in the morning. 

My neighborhood has a watering hole that I somewhat frequent, along with some pillars of my community such as the general manager of the neighborhood diner, the owner of the neighborhood concert venue, the neighborhood barber, among others. While the services these folks provide may not reach the level of importance that the truck drivers on the mountain hold, I still see them in the same sort of light. If one of them decided to throw in the towel, that would have a noticeable  impact on my life. If I were to take a sabbatical, the only people that would be impacted are my teammates, and that impact would be minor in the grand scheme of things. 

These jobs that come with a responsibility to a community, whether critical like the road plowers or less so like the barber, come along with a sense of identity that I long for. From what I can tell, most of the folks that I work with get their sense of identity through other roles that they fill, such as a partner, or a parent, which have their own set of responsibilities. In the past, working in an office setting, there were other responsibilities that could be picked up such as the social organizer for the folks that didn't have a family at home. Given the state of the industry though, nearly everything is remote. While I could look for an in-person role, the "be at your desk" culture that comes with the in-office nine-to-five is still taxing on my mental health, albeit in a different way, and while it may placate the lack of a sense of identity that I'm struggling with, I don't think it would truly solve it. 

There are things one can and should do, such as joining a gym and social clubs that assist with this, but in my eyes a person's job is the main definer of their contributions to society/their community and these sorts of things are just satellites around the planet of unfulfillment. 